@c Copyright (C) 1996-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Authors: Peter Gerwinski <peter@gerwinski.de>
@c          Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 27 Aug 2000 (file up to date)

@include macros.texi

@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
@node Contributors
@appendix Contributors to GNU Pascal.
@cindex contributors
@end ifclear

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
@include version.texi
This file was generated automatically from contributors.texi.@*
@sc{DO NOT CHANGE THIS FILE MANUALLY!}

@settitle Register of Copyrights for GNU Pascal
@node Top
@chapter Register of Copyrights for GNU Pascal
@end ifset

@table @asis
@item Jukka Virtanen
invented GNU Pascal in March 1988, implemented the ISO-7185 and most
of the ISO-10206 standard, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created all files except those listed below, based on the GCC
source.
@end ifset

@item @uref{http://agnes.dida.physik.uni-essen.de/~peter/,Dr.@: Peter Gerwinski}
@anch{peter,added} Borland-Pascal-related and other extensions to
GNU Pascal in summer 1995, ported GPC to EMX, does most of the
development of the compiler since 1996, created and maintains the
WWW home page, maintains the GNU Pascal mailing list, does some
other administrative stuff, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{gpc-nodes.def}, @file{rts/move.pas}, the files in
@file{config/emx/}, and those in @file{doc/} (together with
Jan-Jaap), and extensively modified all files.
@end ifset

@item Jan-Jaap van der Heijden
ported GPC to DJGPP and to Microsoft Windows 95/NT, added ELF
support in spring 1996, solved a lot of configuration and
compatibility problems, created the GPC FAQ, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{Make-lang.in}, @file{Makefile.in},
@file{lang-options.h}, @file{lang-specs.h}, the files in
@file{config/} (except those in @file{config/emx/}), the files in
@file{doc/} (together with Peter), @file{rts/Make*}, and
@file{rts/config*}, and modified @file{module.c} and most other
files.
@end ifset

@item @uref{http://fjf.gnu.de/,Frank Heckenbach}
@anch{frank,rewrote} and maintains the Run Time System since July
1997, wrote most of the standard units distributed with GPC
(including BP compatibility units), wrote a large number of test
programs, maintains the GPC To-Do list
@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
(@pxref{To Do})
@end ifclear
etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created most files in @file{units/}, @file{demos/} and
@file{script/}, and the Pascal files in @file{rts/}, modified all
files in @file{rts/} and most files in @file{doc/}, created many
files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item @uref{http://www.bigfoot.com/~african_chief/,Prof.@: Abimbola A.@: Olowofoyeku (``The African Chief'')}
created the original versions of many BP compatibility units in May
1997, contributed code to other units and the Run Time System,
helped porting GPC and the units to Cygwin and Mingw, wrote a number
of test programs, contributed a Delphi-compatible @samp{SysUtils}
@uref{ftp://agnes.dida.physik.uni-essen.de/home/chief/,unit}, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{units/gpcutil.pas}, parts of
@file{units/system.pas} and @file{rts/filename.pas} and a number of
files in @file{test/}.
@end ifset

@item Nick Burrett
fixed some bugs and cleaned up GPC in May 1998, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{gpc-common.c}, @file{parse.y}, @file{module.c} and
some other files.
@end ifset

@item Matthias Klose
integrated GPC into EGCS and Debian GNU/Linux in May 1998, improved
the installation process, etc.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{Makefile*}, @file{configure} scripts and many
other files.
@end ifset

@item Alexey Volokhov
improved the performance of GPC's module/unit support in June 1997.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He created @file{gpi-hash.c}, @file{gpi-hash.h}, and
@file{circle-buf.c}, and extensively modified @file{module.c}.
@end ifset

@item Bill Currie
implemented more Borland extensions into GPC in July 1997.

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{parse.y}, @file{util.c}, and @file{rts.c}.
@end ifset

@end table

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
All authors listed above have assigned their copyright of past and
future changes of GNU Pascal to the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
@end ifset

@table @asis
@item Russ Whitaker
updated and maintains the GNU Pascal FAQ.
@ifclear AUTHORSONLY
(@pxref{FAQ})
@end ifclear

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He modified @file{faq.texi}.
@end ifset

@end table

@ifset AUTHORSONLY
He has assigned his copyright of past and future changes of the GNU
Pascal FAQ to the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
@end ifset

@ifclear AUTHORSONLY

The development of GNU Pascal profits a lot from independent
contributions (which are not part of the GNU Pascal distribution):

@table @asis

@item Anja Drewitz
set up the archives for the GPC mailing list,
@ref{Mailing List Archives}, in September 1999.

@item Berend de Boer
wrote a lot of useful documentation about Extended Pascal in 1995.

@item @uref{http://www.gerwinski.de/~markus/,Markus Gerwinski}
created the drawing showing a Gnu with Blaise Pascal
@ifset html
@html
<a href="Gnu+Pascal-small.jpg">(JPEG, 3 kB)</a>
<a href="Gnu+Pascal.png">(PNG, 10 kB)</a>
@end html
@end ifset
and helped to design the WWW home page in October 1996.

@item Nicola Girardi
contributed a
@uref{http://agnes.dida.physik.uni-essen.de/~nicola/,GPC unit} for
the @samp{svgalib} graphics library for some platforms in February
2000.

@item Eike Lange
contributed
@uref{ftp://agnes.dida.physik.uni-essen.de/home/lange/,units} to
access MySql, GNU DBM and PostgreSQL data bases in August 2000.

@item Prof.@: Phil Nelson
created a bug reporting system for GPC in October 1996.

@iftex
@ifset html
@ifhtml
@item @uref{http://www.tu-chemnitz.de/~sho/rho/,Robert H&ouml;hne}
@end ifhtml
@end ifset
@ifclear html
@item @uref{http://www.tu-chemnitz.de/~sho/rho/,Robert H@"ohne}
@end ifclear
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@item @uref{http://www.tu-chemnitz.de/~sho/rho/,Robert Hoehne}
@end ifinfo
wrote @uref{http://www.tu-chemnitz.de/~rho/rhide.html,RHIDE}, an
integrated development environment for GNU compilers running under
Dos (DJGPP) and Linux, and added support for GNU Pascal in autumn
1996.

@item Sven Hilscher
wrote a BP compatible @samp{Graph} unit for some platforms, called
@uref{ftp://agnes.dida.physik.uni-essen.de/~gnu-pascal/contrib/,BGI2GRX},
in December 1996.

@item @uref{http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Vista/6573,Dario Anzani (``Predator Zeta'')}
contributed documentation about the use of assembler in GNU Pascal
in May 1997.

@item Lluis de Yzaguirre i Maura
set up a HTML version of the GNU Pascal mailing list archives,
@ref{Mailing List Archives}, in September 1997.

@item @code{(@minus{}:@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}@minus{}:@minus{})}
This space is reserved for @emph{your} name. ;@minus{}) Please
contact us at the GPC mailing list, @ref{Mailing List}, if you have
something interesting for us.

@end table

We thank everybody who supports us by reporting bugs, contributing
knowledge and good ideas, donating development tools, and giving us
the opportunity to test GPC on a large variety of systems. We are
particularly indebted (in alphabetical order, individuals first) to

@noindent
Sietse Achterop,
Geoffrey Arnold,
Uwe Bauermann,
Ariel Bendersky,
Pablo Bendersky,
John Blakeney,
Ernst-Ludwig Bohnen,
Nils Bokermann,
Patrice Bouchand,
Jim Brander,
Matze Braun,
J. David Bryan,
Ricky W. Butler,
Dr. E. Buxbaum,
Larry Carter,
Janet Casey,
Romain Chantereau,
Emmanuel Chaput,
Carl Eric Codere,
Jean-Philippe Combe,
F. Couperin,
Miklos Cserzo,
Tim Currie,
Stefan A. Deutscher,
Thomas Dunbar,
Andreas Eckleder,
Sven Engelhardt,
Klaus Espenlaub,
Toby Ewing,
Joachim Falk,
David Fiddes,
Alfredo Cesar Fontana,
Kevin A. Foss,
Marius Gedminas,
Nicholas Geovanis,
Jose Oliver Gil,
Jakob Heinemann,
Thorsten Hindermann,
Honda Hirotaka,
Mason Ip,
Andreas Jaeger,
David James,
Nathalie Jarosz,
Niels Kristian Bech Jensen,
Achim Kalwa,
Christine Karow,
Tim Kaulmann,
Victor Khimenko,
Russell King,
Prof. Donald E. Knuth,
Tomasz Kowaltowski,
Peter Ulrich Kruppa,
Jochen Kuepper,
Krzysztof Kwapien,
Randy Latimer,
Olivier Lecarme,
Wren Lee,
Martin Liddle,
Kennith Linder,
Stephen Lindholm,
Orlando Llanes,
Miguel Lobo,
Benedict Lofstedt,
John Logsdon,
Maurice Lombardi,
Dmitry S. Luhtionov,
Jesper Lund,
Martin Maechler,
Claude Marinier,
Michael Meeks,
Clyde Meli,
Axel Mellinger,
Jeff Miller,
John Miller,
Russell Minnich,
Rudy Moddemeijer,
Jason Moore,
Scott A. Moore,
Pierre Muller,
Andreas Neumann,
Christian Neumann,
Gerhard Olejniczak,
Alexandre Oliva,
Ole Osterby,
Klaus Friis Ostergaard,
Jean-Marc Ottorini,
Matija Papec,
Miguel A. Alonso Pardo,
Andris Pavenis,
Robert R. Payne,
Opie Pecheux,
Jose M. Perez,
Ronald Perrella,
Pierre Phaneuf,
Nuno Pinhao,
Larry Poorman,
Stuart Pope,
Huge Rademaker,
Mike Reid,
Leon Renkema,
John L. Ries,
Phil Robertson,
Jim Roland,
Marten Jan de Ruiter,
Carl-Johan Schenstrom,
Thomas D. Schneider,
George Shapovalov,
Richard Sharman,
Pat Sharp,
Arcadio Alivio Sincero,
Tomas Srb,
David Starner,
Andrew Stribblehill,
Mark Taylor,
Robin S. Thompson,
Ian Thurlbeck,
Ivan Torshin,
Bernhard Tschirren,
Kresimir Veselic,
Alejandro Villarroel,
Raymond Wang,
Peter Weber,
Christian Wendt,
Gareth Wilson,
Marc van Woerkom,
Michael Worsley,
Takashi Yamanoue,
George L. Yang,
Salaam Yitbarek,
Dafi Yondra,
Eli Zaretskii,
Mariusz Zynel,
the @cite{BIP} at the @cite{University of Birmingham, UK},
the @cite{Institut fuer Festkoerperforschung (IFF)} at the @cite{Forschungszentrum Juelich}, Germany,

@noindent and everybody we might have forgotten to mention here.
Thanks to all of you!

@c The following text should appear in all versions of the manual,
@c but not on the GPC home page.
@ifset html
@html
<!--MAKE-HOMEPAGE-CUT-->
@end html
@end ifset

GNU Pascal is based on GNU CC by Richard Stallman.  Several people have
contributed to GNU CC:

@c -- JJ 13jul96: should we keep all these ?
@c I already zapped a number of irrelevant ones.
@c
@c Keep them, but with a note that we are talking about GNU C now.
@c (I zapped another one who contributed to the C++ front-end.)
@c (Or: ask the FSF.) -- PG, 2. Aug 1996

@itemize @bullet
@item
The idea of using RTL and some of the optimization ideas came from
the program PO written at the University of Arizona by Jack Davidson
and Christopher Fraser.  See ``Register Allocation and Exhaustive
Peephole Optimization'', Software Practice and Experience 14 (9),
Sept. 1984, 857-866.

@item
Paul Rubin wrote most of the preprocessor.

@item
Leonard Tower wrote parts of the parser, RTL generator, and RTL
definitions, and of the Vax machine description.

@item
Ted Lemon wrote parts of the RTL reader and printer.

@item
Jim Wilson implemented loop strength reduction and some other
loop optimizations.

@item
Nobuyuki Hikichi of Software Research Associates, Tokyo, contributed
the support for the Sony NEWS machine.

@item
Charles LaBrec contributed the support for the Integrated Solutions
68020 system.

@item
Michael Tiemann of Cygnus Support wrote the support for inline
functions and instruction scheduling.  Also the descriptions of the
National Semiconductor 32000 series cpu, the SPARC cpu and part of
the Motorola 88000 cpu.

@item
Jan Stein of the Chalmers Computer Society provided support for
Genix, as well as part of the 32000 machine description.

@item
Randy Smith finished the Sun FPA support.

@item
Robert Brown implemented the support for Encore 32000 systems.

@item
David Kashtan of SRI adapted GNU CC to VMS.

@item
Alex Crain provided changes for the 3b1.

@item
Greg Satz and Chris Hanson assisted in making GNU CC work on HP-UX
for the 9000 series 300.

@item
William Schelter did most of the work on the Intel 80386 support.

@item
Christopher Smith did the port for Convex machines.

@item
Paul Petersen wrote the machine description for the Alliant FX/8.

@item
Dario Dariol contributed the four varieties of sample programs that
print a copy of their source.

@item
Alain Lichnewsky ported GNU CC to the Mips cpu.

@item
Devon Bowen, Dale Wiles and Kevin Zachmann ported GNU CC to the
Tahoe.

@item
Jonathan Stone wrote the machine description for the Pyramid
computer.

@item
Gary Miller ported GNU CC to Charles River Data Systems machines.

@item
Richard Kenner of the New York University Ultracomputer Research
Laboratory wrote the machine descriptions for the AMD 29000, the DEC
Alpha, the IBM RT PC, and the IBM RS/6000 as well as the support for
instruction attributes.  He also made changes to better support RISC
processors including changes to common subexpression elimination,
strength reduction, function calling sequence handling, and
condition code support, in addition to generalizing the code for
frame pointer elimination.

@item
Richard Kenner and Michael Tiemann jointly developed reorg.c, the
delay slot scheduler.

@item
Mike Meissner and Tom Wood of Data General finished the port to the
Motorola 88000.

@item 
Masanobu Yuhara of Fujitsu Laboratories implemented the machine
description for the Tron architecture (specifically, the Gmicro).

@item
James van Artsdalen wrote the code that makes efficient use of the
Intel 80387 register stack.

@item
Mike Meissner at the Open Software Foundation finished the port to
the MIPS cpu, including adding ECOFF debug support, and worked on
the Intel port for the Intel 80386 cpu.

@item
Ron Guilmette implemented the @code{protoize} and @code{unprotoize}
tools, the support for Dwarf symbolic debugging information, and
much of the support for System V Release 4.  He has also worked
heavily on the Intel 386 and 860 support.

@item
Torbjorn Granlund implemented multiply- and divide-by-constant
optimization, improved long long support, and improved leaf function
register allocation.

@item
Mike Stump implemented the support for Elxsi 64 bit CPU.

@item
John Wehle added the machine description for the Western Electric
32000 processor used in several 3b series machines (no relation to
the National Semiconductor 32000 processor).

@end itemize
@end ifclear
