@c Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Author: Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 27 Aug 2000 (file up to date)

@ifclear macrosset
@set macrosset

@c This file defines the following macros for the GPC Manual.
@c They are suitable for both HTML and non-HTML versions

@c @@NOTE: All of them must be contained within one line,
@c         including arguments.

@c @localuref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}: Like `@uref' for references
@c within the GPC web page. Currently only with 2 arguments.

@c @anch{NAME,TEXT}: Create an HTML anchor. In non-HTML versions,
@c just TEXT appears.
@c @@NOTE: `@anch' *must* be at the start of a line (problem with
@c         texinfo 1.6[12]). If not, you won't get an error, just
@c         buggy output, so beware...
@c @@ texinfo (1.6[12]) doesn't appear to support text within an
@c    anchor, so we put it after the anchor. The difference is
@c    minimal.

@c @examplehref{FILENAME}: Reference to a GPC demo program.

@c @xexamplehref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}: Like `@examplehref', but
@c with a specific description instead of `Example'.

@ifset html
@macro localuref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
@uref{\FILENAME\,\DESCRIPTION\}
@end macro
@macro anch{NAME,TEXT}
@anchor{\NAME\}
\TEXT\
@end macro
@macro xexamplehref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
@uref{\FILENAME\,[\DESCRIPTION\]}
@end macro
@end ifset
@ifclear html
@macro localuref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
\DESCRIPTION\ (@file{\FILENAME\} on GPC's WWW home page)
@end macro
@macro anch{NAME,TEXT}
\TEXT\
@end macro
@macro xexamplehref{FILENAME,DESCRIPTION}
[\DESCRIPTION\ (\FILENAME\)]
@end macro
@end ifclear
@macro examplehref{FILENAME}
@xexamplehref{\FILENAME\,Example}
@end macro

@end ifclear
