This file is part of the RISC OS Packaging Project distribution of DrWimp.

DrWimp was originally written by Andrew Ayre.  Since 1st May 1999 it has been maintained and developed by Ray Favre.  A list of other contributors can be found in the file "<DrWimpLib$Dir>.Documents.Addr+Cred".

The upstream sources were downloaded from the URLs:

http://www.rayfavre.me.uk/Downloads/Package/DW460.zip
http://www.rayfavre.me.uk/Downloads/Package/Docs460.zip
http://www.rayfavre.me.uk/Downloads/Package/Utils.zip
http://www.rayfavre.me.uk/Downloads/Package/Examples.zip

on 19th October 2006.  There is a homepage at the URL:

http://www.rayfavre.me.uk/drwimp.html

DrWimp is subject to the following licence (from the file DrWimp, which has been renamed in this package to include the version number):

== begin ==
© Andrew Ayre 1995-98
Major updates and additions by Guy Bartle
© Ray Favre - additions/changes 1999-2006
Version 4.60 (01-Oct-06)

*** CONDITIONS OF USE ***
--------------------------------------------------------------------
The Dr Wimp package is distributed on an ”As Is• basis, without
warranty. No liability can be accepted for any consequential loss or
damage, however caused, arising from the use of this package.

The Dr Wimp package (apart from the 3rd party utilities as detailed in
the !!ReadMe!! file) may only be distributed as a whole. For
conditions of use of these 3rd party applications see their own !Help
files.

Distribution of the Dr Wimp package (and programs constructed using
the DrWimp library) by third parties:

Freeware. The DrWimp library may be distributed for free and without
the documentation, examples, utilities, etc. if it is being used as
part of a freeware product. (It would be nice if your documentation
acknowledged Dr Wimp - and don't forget that my web-site has a page
for links to your Dr Wimp applications, if you let me know .....)

Shareware. Those using Dr Wimp to produce Shareware products must
donate 10% of the received income from these products to a charity of
their choice within 6 months of receiving the income. The Shareware
user-documentation must state prominently that this charity donation
is being made and also that Dr Wimp was used to produce the product.
The application's name and author should be notified to the Dr Wimp
copyright holder but no prior permission or further contact is needed.

Commercial. If you wish to distribute the Dr Wimp package with a
commercial product (or distribute commercially a program that uses Dr
Wimp) then a specific licence is needed from the Dr Wimp copyright
holder.

Public Domain libraries may make a reasonable charge for materials,
handling, etc. as long as this does not exceed £2.00 (UK) net for the
Dr Wimp package.

The DrWimp library may be reproduced in part if crunching and mangling
utilities such as !BSquasher are used, otherwise it must be reproduced
in whole, complete with its opening REMs containing the Conditions of
Use and the copyright banner.

If the DrWimp library is being reproduced in full then it may be added
to the !RunImage (or similar) file, and does not have to be separate.

The author retains copyright of Dr Wimp, documentation and examples at
all times.
== end ==
