Document No.1852007 version 1 dated 18 May 2007

LICENCE TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION OF
RISC OS AND ITS DERIVATIVES

This licence agreement ("Licence") is between Castle Technology Limited
("Castle") and any person ("You", "Your") who exercises any of the legal
rights over any components of the computer operating system known as RISC OS
granted by Castle in this Licence. The phrase "RISC OS" used in this Licence
refers to those components of version 5.0 of RISC OS that Castle chooses to
release from time to time and any subsequent release of RISC OS which is
made generally available by Castle pursuant to this Licence. The phrase
"Derivative Work" means any derivative work which is based on, or derived
from, RISC OS or any part of RISC OS (whether by modification or
translation) and any work subsequently derived from such Derivative Work or
any part of it PROVIDED THAT such work is only intended to be used in
conjunction with an embodiment (whether physical or emulated) of one or more
versions of the ARM processor architecture. By exercising any of the rights
granted to You by Castle pursuant to this Licence You indicate Your
acceptance of all of the terms and conditions of this Licence which shall
therefore be legally binding on You.


1:      LICENCE GRANT

1.1:    Subject to the restrictions set out in the remainder of this Licence
Castle hereby grants to You a non-exclusive royalty free worldwide licence
to use, copy and distribute the RISC OS source code and object code in any
medium PROVIDED THAT you ensure that each copy You distribute incorporates
the text of, or an Internet link to, this Licence.

1.2:    You may modify your copy of RISC OS or any part of it (and any
Derivative Work or any part of it) to create a Derivative Work and You may
copy and distribute the source code and object code of such Derivative Work
in any medium PROVIDED THAT you meet all of the following conditions:

1.2.1:  You shall ensure that each Derivative Work You distribute carries a
notice stating that it is ultimately derived from RISC OS and the date of
Your modifications;

1.2.2:  You shall ensure that each Derivative Work You distribute as source
code prominently carries the following header text in each individual source
code file:

This source code in this file is licensed to You by Castle Technology
Limited ("Castle") and its licensors on contractual terms and conditions
("Licence") which entitle you freely to modify and/or to distribute this
source code subject to Your compliance with the terms of the Licence.

This source code has been made available to You without any warranties
whatsoever. Consequently, Your use, modification and distribution of this
source code is entirely at Your own risk and neither Castle, its licensors
nor any other person who has contributed to this source code shall be liable
to You for any loss or damage which You may suffer as a result of Your use,
modification or distribution of this source code.

Full details of Your rights and obligations are set out in the Licence. You
should have received a copy of the Licence with this source code file. If
You have not received a copy, the text of the Licence is available online at
www.castle-technology.co.uk/riscosbaselicence.htm

1.2.3:  You shall ensure that each Derivative Work distributed by You is
distributed and licensed in its entirety at no charge on the terms of this
Licence to any third party who is prepared to accept the terms of this
Licence. If any part of any Derivative Work distributed by You can
reasonably be considered an independent and separate work then this Licence
shall not apply to any such part where You distribute such part as an
independent and separate work;

1.2.4:  You undertake, in respect of each Derivative Work that You
distribute, to make the whole source code of every individual component of
the Derivative Work available for unrestricted access by third parties by
including a copy of the source code with Your distribution and/or by
uploading the source code to the official RISC OS source code repository at
www.riscosopen.org/content/sources

1.2.5:  You hereby grant to Castle a royalty free worldwide licence (with
the right to grant sub-licences) to incorporate into RISC OS or any
Derivative Work produced by Castle, the whole or any part of any Derivative
Work which You create or distribute pursuant to this Licence. You
acknowledge that Castle may make the whole or any part of RISC OS or any
Derivative Work produced by Castle available to OEM organisations on
commercial terms for incorporation into hardware products intended for sale.
Your hereby waive any moral rights You may have in any part of any
Derivative Work which Castle so incorporates into RISC OS or any Derivative
Work produced by Castle. Nothing in this Clause 1.2.5 shall oblige Castle to
incorporate into RISC OS or any Derivative Work produced by Castle any part
of any Derivative Work which You create or distribute pursuant to this
Licence.


2:      LICENCE RESTRICTIONS

2.1:    You may not copy, modify, sublicense or distribute RISC OS or any
Derivative Work except as expressly provided under this Licence. Any attempt
by You otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute RISC OS or any
Derivative Work shall be void and shall lead to the automatic termination of
Your rights under this Licence but such termination shall not affect the
rights of any person to whom You have distributed RISC OS or any Derivative
Work provided they continue to comply with the terms and conditions of this
Licence.

2.2:    You may not impose on any third party to whom You have distributed
copies of RISC OS or any Derivative Work any licence restrictions other than
those set out in this Licence.

2.3:    If, as a consequence of any court judgment, allegation of
infringement of any proprietary right or any other reason You are unable to
comply fully with the terms and conditions of this Licence then You shall
refrain from distributing RISC OS or such Derivative Works (as appropriate)
for the duration of such non-compliance.

2.4:    This Licence is not an OEM licence. Consequently, You may not
incorporate or embed RISC OS or any Derivative Work or any part of them in
any hardware product which is intended for commercial sale, nor may You
distribute, sell, supply or otherwise dispose of any such hardware product
unless You have obtained the prior written consent of Castle. Castle is
generally prepared to grant OEM licences on commercial terms to any person
who wishes to incorporate or embed RISC OS or any Derivative Work or any
part of them into a hardware product and/or to sell, supply or otherwise
dispose of such hardware products. Details of Castle's standard OEM
licensing terms are available from Castle's website at www.castle-techology.
co.uk/riscosoemlicence.htm or by email from oem.enquiries@castle-technology.
co.uk


3:      NO WARRANTY

3.1:    RISC OS AND ALL DERIVATIVE WORKS ARE SUPPLIED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS THAT RISC OS AND/OR ANY DERIVATIVE
WORK IS ERROR FREE, FIT FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT ITS USE,
MODIFICATION OR DISTRIBUTION SHALL NOT LEAD TO INFRINGEMENT OF ANY THIRD
PARTY PROPRIETARY RIGHTS. ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS ARE EXCLUDED
TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW.


4:      DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY

4.1:    IN NO EVENT SHALL CASTLE OR ANY PERSON WHO HAS MODIFIEID AND/OR
DISTRIBUTED THE WHOLE OR ANY PART OF RISC OS OR ANY DERIVATIVE WORK IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS LICENCE BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ANY LOSS OR DAMAGE
WHATSOEVER ARISING OUT OF YOUR USE, MODIFICATION OR DISTRIBUTION OR YOUR
INABILITY TO USE, MODIFY OR DISTRIBUTE RISC OS OR ANY DERIVATIVE WORK OR
YOUR EXERCISE OF ANY OF THE RIGHTS GRANTED UNDER THIS LICENCE (INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF OR DAMAGE TO YOUR OR ANY THIRD PARTY'S DATA CAUSED BY
ANY DEFECT IN RISC OS OR ANY DERIVATIVE WORK OR ANY INCOMPATIBILITY BETWEEN
RISC OS OR ANY DERIVATIVE WORK AND ANY OTHER SOFTWARE). ALL SUCH LIABILITIES
ARE EXCLUDED TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.
